---
layout: doc
title: Calculating the Three Options
published: true
---
### Options

>This section of Blazewater coding is a critical part that decides how to distribute dollars to each goal, starting with Basic Security and then moving on to the rest of Goal Funding (a section that will be described separately). It performs calculations to show the various possible uses of dollars a client has available to put towards either goals or spending; in other words, the “options” that a client has for using their income. It does NOT discuss stock market derivatives, which are also called “options”.
djsfbjsdg
 
The f this calculation is done in the section titled `Strategy Exercise`, where the three different choices for levels of spending vs. savings are calculated and a discretionary amount of flexible spending has been determined in each option.
 
The calculation proceeds in this section by understanding just how many dollars are truly available to send towards goals after accounting for some necessary variable costs. To do this, it first looks up a Cost of Living (COL) buffer, which represents an amount of day to day expenses that are essential but variable, and which the client has not reported during the data gathering process, such as food, auto fuel, and basic personal care items.
 
The COL buffer is the absolute minimum amount of “flex spending” a client could be allowed in a financial plan produced by Blazewater. This amount is currently determined by household size and income without regard to geographic location. Household size is defined as the number of adults (1 or 2) and children (0, 1, 2, or 3+) that the client needs to support on their given income. Income is defined by gross household salary in bands of $10,000 up to $150,000, over which point the COL buffer is maxed out for the household size. The total COL buffer for the first year is calculated then divided by 52 to obtain a weekly amount.
 
(Click [here](https://learnvest.atlassian.net/wiki/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=57278496#BlazewaterDocumentation(forPlanners)-col) for a list of household buffer amounts.)
 
Blazewater then looks up the amount of discretionary flex spending determined in each option by the Strategy Exercise and attempts to add the COL buffer. If the discretionary flex spending calculated in a particular option from the Strategy Exercise is zero or more, the COL buffer will simply be added to the flex spending amount. The total will become the true “flex spending” number that is actually shown to the client in each option of the Strategy Exercise.
 
Let’s go over that again, because it’s important and it’s different from the way we’ve done things in the past. In figuring the “flex spending” numbers that clients see in their Three Options, Blazewater is adding the COL buffer to a value called “discretionary flex.” Knowing the difference between those terms will help the rest of the documentation make a little more sense.
 
If the discretionary flex spending in a given option from the Strategy Exercise is negative (for example, when an option recommends setting more aside towards goals than a client currently can do based on their income, expenses, and minimum debt payments), then the client’s weekly flex spending number will be set to the COL buffer. Again, this is the minimum amount a client could have to spend on essential variable costs in any financial plan run by Blazewater. Then, the system will attempt to calculate how much in fixed costs the client will need to cut in order to leave room for this bare minimum flex spending by taking one year of the client’s fixed costs plus one year of non-monthly expenses.
 
Then, for clients who rent their primary housing, a housing buffer amount is subtracted from the total of all fixed and non-monthly expenses, in order to prevent the software from delivering a plan in which the fixed costs of that type of client are reduced below what is reasonable and feasible. This housing buffer is determined by household size (1 or 2 adults and 0, 1,2, or 3+ children) and geographic location (state of residence). For clients who have a mortgage on their primary residence, the housing payment is ensured since Blazewater makes no recommended reductions to minimum debt payments.
 
Once the pool of fixed expenses that are able to be reduced has been determined (always leaving room for minimum housing costs), the next step is to determine how much of that pool needs to be reduced per month in order to not outspend income while leaving room in the client’s budget for essential variable costs. The total by which the weekly discretionary flex spending of a particular Strategy Exercise option (including COL buffer) is negative is multiplied by 52 weeks in order to get the annual amount of reductions necessary, then divided by 12 to get the monthly reduction amount. The required monthly reduction amount in fixed costs (along with an inflation adjustment each year) will be conveyed in the financial plan to the client.
 
A reduction in flexible costs might also become necessary in the timeline of the plan as incomes and expenses increase with inflation and retirement contributions possibly take up a bigger and bigger chunk of the client’s dollars. To calculate how much this reduction should be, Blazewater will first aggregate the total recommended flexible spending amount for the first year of the client’s plan (“Year One”) for each scenario or option. It will then determine the total funds available for spending or saving for Year One by taking the client’s net income and any contributions to an employer’s retirement plan that cause a shortfall for the client (debt-financed retirement contributions), then reducing that by all fixed costs, non-monthly expenses, and minimum debt payments for Year One. If the result is negative or if the flexible spending amount will exceed the available dollars, it is an indication that there is a shortfall for the client that year and that they will need to consider reducing their costs in order to avoid going into debt. Blazewater will recommend that the client cut flexible spending down to the minimum COL buffer prior to cutting fixed costs since it is generally easier for clients to find quick ways to cut back on flexible costs. In all cases, it’s worth reiterating that the absolute minimum amount for flexible spending that the client sees in a financial plan will be the COL buffer. If a client needs to cut costs beyond this amount, Blazewater will recommend cutting from fixed and non-monthly costs instead.
 
Another interesting feature of this part of the calculations is that Blazewater will recommend ramping up retirement contributions (if the client is not yet making their target contribution) beyond what appears to be “available” by cutting discretionary flex costs, rather than simply stopping at the available pool of money left over after fixed, non-monthly, and discretionary flex costs are covered, as is currently the case in Lightning software.
 
After all these calculations are performed, the amount of dollars a client could truly send to goals for each option in the Strategy Exercise is determined. Blazewater starts with net income plus any contributions to employer retirement plans that are causing the client to have a shortfall in covering essential and fixed costs (debt-financed retirement contributions), then subtracts fixed costs, minimum payments, non-monthly expenses, the client’s true flex spending as determine above (which includes the COL buffer), and any amounts that are ramping the client up to meet their ideal retirement contribution target per the Retirement module. It then adds back in any reduction of flexible costs that will be recommended to the client, and finally subtracts the value of fixed cost cuts that will be recommended specifically in order to ramp up retirement contributions.
 
Once the final pool of dollars that is available to fund goals has been determined for Year One of the plan, the system will recalculate this pool for each year of the plan and for each of the options from the Strategy Exercise until the end of the client’s lifetime given inflation in expenses and income, any increasing retirement contributions, and any dollars that are freed up by paying off debt or completing a savings goal. If this pool of funds turns negative (a shortfall for the client) in any future years beyond Year One, Blazewater will recommend cutting fixed costs and will not ramp up retirement contributions. Beyond these impacts, shortfalls do not impact any other recommendations in the financial plan at this time.
 
For each option in the Strategy Exercise, the total savings and the savings rate based on the previous calculations are determined and displayed to the client and the planner. The annual savings amount is based on available funds plus any increases to retirement contributions, including those that come at the expense of reducing fixed costs down to the minimum housing buffer.
 
Another feature of the calculations in this section is that any dollars that are available to fund goals per above are aggregated over the entire year then averaged out monthly. This can sometimes result in a higher savings amount over the year than the client can do on a monthly basis, especially when the client will receive extra income or will pay off a debt with minimum payments at some point during the year. To account for this possibility, Blazewater keeps a running balance for each month’s projections of savings to understand if the client met the average savings goal that month. The balance is set to zero at the beginning of a year, then could be positive or negative each month depending on the funds that are available to send to goals. In effect, this takes the philosophical planning perspective that if a client expects any windfalls, they may primarily end up funding their goals through those windfalls rather than a higher monthly savings amount – thus putting spending before savings on a monthly basis and not encouraging a monthly savings habit.
