---
layout: doc
title: Emergency Savings
published: true
---
## Basic Security
 
Funding allocations to the client’s emergency fund in Blazewater can be broken down into two parts: basic security and additional months of funding. This section focuses on the basic security portion of funding; additional funding is described in the [Goal Funding](https://learnvest.atlassian.net/wiki/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=57278496#BlazewaterDocumentation(forPlanners)-GoalFunding) and [Savings Goals](https://learnvest.atlassian.net/wiki/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=57278496#BlazewaterDocumentation(forPlanners)-SavingsGoals) modules.
The LearnVest philosophy of basic financial security includes ensuring clients have a minimum one month's net income in emergency savings in cash, paying off any credit card debt within five years, and getting on track with recommended retirement savings by ramping up savings every year until the target contribution is reached or the client has no additional available funds to contribute even after cutting flexible and fixed costs. Of these three goals, Blazewater treats the retirement goal as the primary goal. This funding is described in the module on Retirement.
Once retirement funding has been accounted for, Blazewater treats basic security emergency funding as the next highest priority goal. The size of the basic security emergency fund goal is based on one month of the highest income earner’s average monthly take-home pay, including any part-time, freelance, or self-employment work, but excluding any windfalls such as gifts or bonuses*. If the client’s emergency fund balance is below this size, they will be forced to use all remaining available funding after recommended retirement contributions in a month towards emergency fund savings during the first year of the plan (“Year One”).
The first Planners to use Blazewater noticed that, after the Emergency Fund reached its baseline level – i.e., an amount equal to one month’s net income, few dollars flowed toward this goal in the ensuing years. And while the software ensures no client will reach her down payment goal before having built a full emergency fund, those with no plans to buy a house have no back-end deadline on building a full emergency fund.
We sought to address by creating a second goal package that includes a 20% floor on the amount of goals dollars that will flow toward emergency savings once the client has reached his basic security milestones. Because this floor comes into play only after the client reaches basic security, we won’t talk too much about it in this section. To learn more about the 20% floor, [click here](https://learnvest.atlassian.net/wiki/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=57278496#BlazewaterDocumentation(forPlanners)-twenty).
If the entire basic security emergency fund is completed within the first year of the plan, the funds will become available to be used to ensure credit cards can be paid off within 5 years. If credit cards are already on track to be paid off within 5 years, the funds will become available to be used towards any other goal, including the full emergency fund goal amount, per the Goal Funding methods.
*For a more in-depth conversation about which incomes constitute "windfalls," click [here](https://learnvest.atlassian.net/wiki/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=57278496#BlazewaterDocumentation(forPlanners)-windfall). 
 
 
## What if our retirement recommendations preclude building a baseline emergency fund?
 
Starting with Blazewater’s initial release in late 2015, Planners noticed cases in which the software’s laser focus on retirement savings removed some clients’ ability to build even a month’s worth of emergency savings.
While this scenario isn’t terribly common, it’s easy to see how it could come about given a retirement savings regime that calls for all clients to save the maximum of 1% of gross income or the amount needed to unlock their full employer match. And given that Blazewater recommends almost all clients increase retirement savings relative to income in the ensuing years, one can imagine scenarios in which clients never build ample emergency savings, let alone meeting significant milestones in Year One of their Plans.
To ensure a larger percentage of clients achieve the baseline emergency savings amount LearnVest recommends, we implemented the following solution: we’ll postpone for one year the “retirement ramp” for clients whose savings dollars are too scarce to meet our retirement recommendations and build a month’s worth of emergency savings within the first 12 months of their Plans.
A client triggers this adjustment if:
- She lacks a month’s worth of emergency savings at the date her Plan begins, and 
- Removing from her savings dollars the amount she’d need to save 1% of gross income toward retirement, or meet her employer match, or both, would leave her with too few dollars to save a month’s worth of net income into her emergency fund within the first 12 months of her Plan.

The feature in question removes for a year the recommendation for a client to increase retirement savings.
It’s best to interpret that sentence narrowly: this adjustment never leads Blazewater to recommend a reduction of retirement savings; and the postponement of anincrease includes recommending a client who saves nothing toward retirement at the beginning of his Plan continue saving nothing for a full year.
> It’s worth noting that the retirement savings delay always lasts 12 months: the absence of the retirement ramp might actually allow a client to amass more than a month’s worth of emergency savings during that time, or the client’s savings dollars might be so scarce that she’s left with less than a month of savings by that time. It’s hard to imagine the latter situation coming to pass – Blazewater would likely “safety-valve” a client so strapped of resources – but we’re mentioning it just to note the rigidity of this feature. 